The future of natural language processing: The bots
Frequently used in customer service, especially in banking, retail and hospitality, chatbots help customers get right to the point without the wait, answering customer questions and directing them to relevant resources and products at any hour, any day of the week. To be effective, chatbots must be fast, smart and easy to use, especially in a customer service context where users have high expectations (and sometimes low patience) for being understood. To accomplish this, chatbots employ NLP to understand language, usually over text or voice-recognition interactions, where users communicate in their own words, as they would speak to an agent. Integration with semantic and other cognitive technologies that enable a deeper understanding of human language will allow chatbots to get even better at understanding and replying to more complex and longer-form requests and functions in more than a single context, all in real time.

This expanded functionality will also benefit other types of bots to make them more effective and intuitive over time, from virtual assistants like Siri and Amazon’s Alexa to bot platforms that are more automation or task oriented. These bots will increasingly use NLP to understand text and perform actions such as sharing geo information, retrieving links and images or execute other more complex actions for us, and you can see some of these at work in some of the most common messaging applications.

The future of natural language processing: Supporting invisible UI
Human communication—both conversation and text—are part of most every interaction we have with machines. Amazon’s Echo is just one example of the move toward a future that puts humans more directly in contact with technology. The concept of an invisible or zero user interface will rely on direct interaction between user and machine, whether through voice, text or a combination of the two. NLP that leverages a greater contextual understanding of human language, in other words, as it gets better at understating us—what we say no matter how we say it, and what we are doing—will be essential for any invisible or zero UI application.


The future of NLP: Smarter search
The future of NLP is also for smarter search—something we’ve been talking about here at Expert System for a long time. Applied to search, the same capabilities that allow a chatbot to understand a customer’s request can enable “search like you talk” functionality (much like you could query Siri) rather than focusing on keywords or topics. Recently, Google announced that it has added NLP capabilities to Google Drive to allow users to search for documents and content using conversational language.

The future of NLP: Intelligence from unstructured information
An understanding of human language is especially powerful when applied to extract information and reveal meaning and sentiment in large amounts of text content (aka unstructured information), especially the types of content that must be manually examined by people. Analysis that accurately understands the subtleties of language—the choice of words, the tone used—can provide useful knowledge and insight of information, especially in the carefully worded language of annual reports, call transcripts and other investor-sensitive communications, as well as legal and compliance documents.

More effective and accurate understanding between humans and machines will only strengthen the efficiencies of both. No matter where it is applied, NLP will be essential in understanding the true voice of the user and the customer and facilitating more seamless interaction on any platform where language and human communication are used.

Hiring tools
On the topic of HR, natural language processing software has long helped hiring managers sort through resumes. Using the same techniques as Google search, automated candidate sourcing tools scan applicant CVs to pinpoint people with the required background for a job. But — like early machine translation — the sorting algorithms these platforms used made a lot of mistakes. Say an applicant called herself a “business growth brainstormer” instead of an “outside sales rep”: Her resume wouldn’t show in results and your company would overlook a creative, client-driven candidate.

Today’s systems move beyond exact keyword match. Scout, for example, addresses the synonym issue by searching for HR’s originally provided keywords, then using results to identify new words to look for. Extrapolating new terms (like “business growth”) keeps qualified candidates from slipping between the cracks. And since women and minorities use language differently, the process makes sure they don’t either.

Of course, diverse candidates can’t be considered if they don’t apply. To address that problem, there’s Textio. Cofounder and CEO Kieran Snyder says the augmented writing tool uses semantic categorization, a natural language processing technique, to help recruiters craft gender-neutral job descriptions. Scoring posts on a scale of zero to 100 as you write, Textio provides vocabulary, syntax, and formatting tips like “add more bullet points.” Implement these changes and client case studies suggest you’ll see a radical improvement in applicant numbers: Snyder says Johnson & Johnson experienced a 9 percent increase in female applicants, Avery Dennison saw a 60 percent increase, and “Expedia found that jobs that were gender-neutral filled nearly three weeks faster.”